.TH iverilog-vpi 1 "$Date: 2004/10/04 01:10:53 $" Version "$Date: 2004/10/04 01:10:53 $"
.SH NAME
iverilog-vpi - Compile front end for VPI modules

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B iverilog-vpi
[--name=\fIname\fP]
\fIsourcefile\fP...

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fIiverilog-vpi\fP is a tool to simplify the compilation of VPI
modules for use with Icarus Verilog. It takes on the command line a
list of C or C++ source files, and generates as output a linked VPI
module. See the \fBvvp\fP(1) man page for a description of how the
linked module is loaded by a simulation.

The output is named after the first source file. For example, if the
first source file is named \fIfoo.c\fP, the output becomes
\fIfoo.vpi\fP.

.SH OPTIONS
.l
\fIiverilog-vpi\fP accepts the following options:
.TP 8
.B -l\fIlibrary\fP
Include the named library in the link of the VPI module. This allows
VPI modules to further reference external libraries.

.TP 8
.B -I\fIdirectory\fP
Add \fIdirectory\fP to the list of directories that will be search for
header files.

.TP 8
.B -D\fIdefine\fP
Define a macro named \fIdefine\fP.

.TP 8
.B --name=\fIname\fP
Normally, the output VPI module will be named after the first source
file passed to the command. This flag sets the name (without the .vpi
suffix) of the output vpi module.

.TP 8
.B --install-dir
This flag causes the program to print the install directory for VPI
modules, then exit. It is a convenience for makefiles or automated
plug-in installers.

.TP 8
.B --cflags, --ldflags and -ldlibs
These flags provide compile time information.

.SH "PC-ONLY OPTIONS"

The PC port of \fIiverilog-vpi\fP includes two special flags needed to
support the more intractable development environment. These flags help
the program locate parts that it needs.

.TP 8
.B -mingw=\fIpath\fP
Tell the program the root of the Mingw compiler tool suite. The
\fBvvp\fP runtime is compiled with this compiler, and this is the
compiler that \fIiverilog-vpi\fP expects to use to compile your source
code. This is normally not needed, and if you do use it, it is only
needed once. The compiler will save the \fIpath\fP in the registry for
use later.

.TP 8
.B -ivl=\fIpath\fP
Set for the use during compilation the root if the Icarus Verilog
install. This is the place where you installed Icarus Verilog when you
ran the installer. This flag is also only needed once, and the path is
stored in the registry for future use.

.SH "UNIX-ONLY OPTIONS"

The UNIX version of \fIiverilog-vpi\fP includes additional flags to
let Makefile gurus peek at the configuration of the \fIiverilog\fP
installation.  This way, Makefiles can be written that handle complex VPI
builds natively, and without hard-coding values that depend on the
system and installation.  If used at all, these options must be
used one at a time, and without any other options or directives.

.TP 8
.B --cflags
Print the compiler flags (CFLAGS or CXXFLAGS) needed to compile source
code destined for a VPI module.

.TP 8
.B --ldflags
Print the linker flags (LDFLAGS) needed to link a VPI module.

.TP 8
.B --ldlibs
Print the libraries (LDLIBS) needed to link a VPI module.

.TP 8
.B -m32
On 64bit systems that support it (and support vvp32) this flag
requests a 32bit vpi binary instead of the default 64bit binary.

.P
Example GNU makefile that takes advantage of these flags:
.IP "" 4
CFLAGS = -Wall -O $(CFLAGS_$@)
.br
VPI_CFLAGS := $(shell iverilog-vpi --cflags)
.br
CFLAGS_messagev.o = $(VPI_CFLAGS)
.br
CFLAGS_fifo.o = $(VPI_CFLAGS)
.br
messagev.o fifo.o: transport.h
.br
messagev.vpi: messagev.o fifo.o
.br
	iverilog-vpi $^

.SH "AUTHOR"
.nf
Steve Williams (steve@icarus.com)

.SH SEE ALSO
iverilog(1), vvp(1),
.BR "<http://www.icarus.com/eda/verilog/>",
.BR "<http://www.mingw.org>",

.SH COPYRIGHT
.nf
Copyright \(co  2002 Stephen Williams

This document can be freely redistributed according to the terms of the
GNU General Public License version 2.0
